..
    : Horton is a development platform for electronic structure methods.
    : Copyright (C) 2011-2015 The Horton Development Team
    :
    : This file is part of Horton.
    :
    : Horton is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
    : modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License
    : as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 3
    : of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
    :
    : Horton is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
    : but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
    : MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
    : GNU General Public License for more details.
    :
    : You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
    : along with this program; if not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>
    :
    : --

Atoms-in-Molecules (AIM) analysis
#################################

Introduction
============

Horton supports several real-space atoms-in-molecules (AIM) schemes. A
wavefunction or an electronic density on a grid can be loaded from several
file formats. With such input, several AIM schemes can be used to derive AIM
observables, e.g. atomic charge, atomic multipole expansion, etc.

Horton supports two different approaches to perform the partitioning: WPart
(based on wavefunction files) and CPart (based on cube files). Several
wavefunction and cube file formats are supported as documented in
:ref:`ref_file_formats`.

The WPart and CPart implementations build on the same algorithms but use
different types of grids for numerical integration. An overview of both
implementations is given by the following table:

======================== =========================== =========================== ============
Feature                  WPart                       CPart                       References
======================== =========================== =========================== ============
Command-line script      ``horton-wpart.py``         ``horton-cpart.py``
**Boundary conditions**
0D                       X                           X
1D                                                   X
2D                                                   X
3D                                                   X
**AIM schemes**
Becke                    X                                                       [becke1988_multicenter]_
Hirshfeld                X                           X                           [hirshfeld1977]_
Iterative Hirshfeld      X                           X                           [bultinck2007]_
Iterative Stockholder    X                                                       [lillestolen2008]_
Extended Hirshfeld       X                           X                           [verstraelen2013]_
**AIM properties**
Charges                  X                           X
Spin charges             X
Cartesian multipoles     X                           X
Pure/harmonic multipoles X                           X
Radial moments           X                           X
Dispersion coefficients  X                           X                           [tkatchenko2009]_
Spherical decomposition  X
ESP due to each AIM      X                                                       [becke1988_poisson]_
ESP due to pro-atom      X                           X                           [becke1988_poisson]_
Wiberg bond order        X
Kohn-Sham response       X
**Extra options**
Symmetry analysis                                    X
======================== =========================== =========================== ============

Note that Gaussian cube files can be generated from other programs like CPMD,
ADF, Siesta, Crystal, etc. The output of all these program should be compatible
with Horton. Horton can partition all-electron and pseudo-potential
wavefunctions. However, very fine grids are required for all-electron
partitioning with CPart.

For all the Hirshfeld variants, you must first set up a database of pro-atomic
densities, preferably at the same level of theory used for the molecular
computation. The script ``horton-atomdb.py`` facilitates the setup of such a
database.

All output generated by Horton is written to `HDF5
<http://www.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/>`_ files (with extension ``.h5``). These are
binary (compact) platform-independent files that can be post-processed easily
with Python scripts. The script ``horton-hdf2csv.py`` can be used to convert
(part of) an HDF5 file into the "comma-separated value" (CSV) format, which is
supported by most spreadsheet software.

The usage of the four scripts (``horton-atomdb.py``, ``horton-wpart.py``,
``horton-cpart.py`` and ``horton-hdf2csv.py``) will be discussed in :ref:`atomdb`,
:ref:`wpart`, :ref:`cpart`, and :ref:`hdf2csv`, respectively. All scripts have
a ``--help`` option that prints out a complete list of options. The penultimate
section, :ref:`partition`, shows how to use the partitioning code through the
Python interface. The last section, :ref:`faq`, answers some frequently asked
questions about partitioning with Horton.

.. _atomdb:

``horton-atomdb.py`` -- Set up a database of pro-atoms
======================================================

The usage of the script ``horton-atomdb.py`` consists of three steps:

1) **Generate input files** for isolated atom computations for one of the
   following codes: Gaussian03/09, Orca, PSI4 or CP2K. The following example
   generates Gaussian09 inputs for hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen and oxygen::

    horton-atomdb.py input g09 1,6-8 template.com

   The file ``template.com`` is used to generate the input files and will
   be discussed in detail below. A series of directories is created with input
   files for the atomic computations: ``001__h_001_q+00``, ``001__h_002_q-01``,
   ``001__h_003_q-02``, ... Optional arguments can be used to control the range
   of cations and anions, the spin multiplicities, etc. Also a script
   ``run_g09.sh`` is generated to take care of the next step.

   Run ``horton-atomdb.py input --help`` to obtain a complete list of all
   options.

2) **Run the atomic computations.** Just execute the ``run_PROGRAM.sh`` script.
   In this case::

    ./run_g09.sh

   Note that the ``run_PROGRAM.sh`` scripts assume a default installation of
   the corresponding software. In the case of non-standard installations or
   when special calls or environment variables are needed, you must modify this
   script first. (It will not be overwritten when `horton-atomdb.py input ...``
   is executed again.)

3) **Convert the output** of the external programs into a database of
   spherically averaged pro-atom densities (``atoms.h5``). Just run::

    ./horton-atomdb.py convert

   This script also generates figures of the radial densities and Fukui
   functions if ``matplotlib`` is installed. In this step, you may use
   :ref:`ref_grid_option`, although the default setting should be fine for
   nearly all cases.

You may remove some directories for the atomic computations before or after
executing the ``run_PROGRAM.sh`` script. The corresponding atoms will not be
included in the database. Similarly, you may rerun ``horton-atomdb.py input``
to generate more input files. In that case ``run_PROGRAM.sh`` will only consider
the atomic computations that have not been completed yet. In some cases, the
``run_PROGRAM.sh`` script needs to be customized, e.g. you may want to use
``mpirun`` to run the atomic computations in parallel. When such modifications
are made, subsequent runs of ``horton-atomdb.py input ...`` will not overwrite
the ``run_PROGRAM.sh`` script.


Template files
--------------

A template file is simply an input file for an atomic computation, where the
critical parameters (element, charge, ...) are replaced by keys that are
recognized by the input generator of ``horton-atomdb.py``. These keys are:

* ``${element}``: The element symbol of the atom.
* ``${number}``: The atomic number of the atom.
* ``${charge}``: The charge of the atom (or cation, or anion).
* ``${mult}``: The spin multiplicity of the atom

For more advanced cases, you may include (parts of) other files with generic
keys, e.g. for basis sets that are different for every element:

* ``${file:filename}``: This is replaced by the contents of
  ``filename.NNN_PPP_MM``, where ``NNN`` is the atomic number, ``PPP`` is the
  atomic population and ``MM`` is the spin multiplicity. These numbers are
  left-padded with zeros to fix the the length. If a field in the filename is
  zero, it is considered as a wild card. For example, you may use
  ``${file:basis}`` in the template file and store a basis set specification for
  oxygen in the file ``basis.008_000_00``. The basis set from this file will be
  used for all cations and anions of oxygen for any multiplicity, because the
  zeros in the file name act as a wildcard.

* ``${line:filename}``: This is comparable to the previous key, except that all
  replacements are stored in one file. Each (non-empty) line in this file that
  starts with ``NNN_PPP_MM`` has a string that will be filled into the field of
  the file that corresponds to the specified ``NNN_PPP_MM``.

None of the keys are mandatory, although ``${element}`` (or ``${number}``),
``${charge}`` and ``${mult}`` must be present to obtain sensible results.


Simple template file for Gaussian 03/09
---------------------------------------

Thia is a basic template file for atomic computations at the HF/3-21G level::

    %chk=atom.chk
    #p HF/3-21G scf(xqc)

    A random title line

    ${charge} ${mult}
    ${element} 0.0 0.0 0.0

Do not forget to include an empty line at the end. Otherwise, Gaussian will
complain. The first line ``%chk=atom.chk`` is required to write the atomic
wavefunction to a file that is needed in the ``convert`` step of
``horton-atomdb.py``.


Advanced template file for Gaussian 03/09
-----------------------------------------

When custom basis sets are specified with the ``Gen`` keyword in Gaussian, you
have to use keys that include other files. For a database with H, C and O, you
could use the following template:

* ``template.com``::

    %chk=atom.chk
    #p PBE1PBE/Gen scf(xqc)

    A random title line

    ${charge} ${mult}
    ${element} 0.0 0.0 0.0

    ${file:basis}

* ``basis.001_000_00``::

    H 0
    6-31G(d,p)
    ****

* ``basis.006_000_00``::

    C 0
    6-31G(d,p)
    ****

* ``basis.008_000_00``::

    O     0
    S   6   1.00
       8588.5000000              0.00189515
       1297.2300000              0.0143859
        299.2960000              0.0707320
         87.3771000              0.2400010
         25.6789000              0.5947970
          3.7400400              0.2808020
    SP   3   1.00
         42.1175000              0.1138890              0.0365114
          9.6283700              0.9208110              0.2371530
          2.8533200             -0.00327447             0.8197020
    SP   1   1.00
          0.9056610              1.0000000              1.0000000
    SP   1   1.00
          0.2556110              1.0000000              1.0000000
    SP   1   1.00
          0.0845000              1.0000000              1.0000000
    D   1   1.00
          5.1600000              1.0000000
    D   1   1.00
          1.2920000              1.0000000
    D   1   1.00
          0.3225000              1.0000000
    F   1   1.00
          1.4000000              1.0000000
    ****


Simple template file for ORCA
-----------------------------

The following template file uses the built-in ``cc_pVQZ`` basis set of ORCA::

    !HF TightSCF

    %basis
      Basis cc_pVQZ
    end

    *xyz ${charge} ${mult}
    ${element} 0.0 0.0 0.0
    *


Template file for CP2K
----------------------

You must use ``CP2K`` version 2.4-r12857 (or newer). The computation of pro-atoms
with ``CP2K`` is more involved because you have to specify the occupation
of each subshell. The ``ATOM`` program of ``CP2K`` does not simply follow the
Aufbau rule to assign orbital occupations. For now, only the computation of
atomic densities with contracted basis sets and pseudopotentials is supported,
mainly because this is a case where ``CP2K`` offers additional functionality.

The following example can be used to generate a pro-atomic database with the
elements, O, Na, Al and Si with the GTH pseudopotential and the MolOpt basis
set.

* ``template.inp``::

    &GLOBAL
      PROJECT ATOM
      PROGRAM_NAME ATOM
    &END GLOBAL
    &ATOM
      ATOMIC_NUMBER ${number}
      ELECTRON_CONFIGURATION (${mult}) CORE ${line:valence.inc}
      CORE none

      MAX_ANGULAR_MOMENTUM 1
      &METHOD
         METHOD_TYPE UKS
         &XC
           &XC_FUNCTIONAL PBE
           &END XC_FUNCTIONAL
         &END XC
      &END METHOD
      &POTENTIAL
          PSEUDO_TYPE GTH
          POTENTIAL_FILE_NAME ../../PBE_PSEUDOPOTENTIALS
          POTENTIAL_NAME ${line:ppot.inc}
      &END POTENTIAL
      &PP_BASIS
          BASIS_SET_FILE_NAME ../../BASIS_MOLOPT
          BASIS_TYPE CONTRACTED_GTO
          BASIS_SET DZVP-MOLOPT-SR-GTH
      &END PP_BASIS
      &PRINT
        &BASIS_SET ON
        &END
        &ORBITALS ON
        &END
        &POTENTIAL ON
        &END
      &END
    &END ATOM

* ``ppot.inc``::

    008_000_00 GTH-PBE-q6
    011_000_00 GTH-PBE-q9
    013_000_00 GTH-PBE-q3
    014_000_00 GTH-PBE-q4

* ``valence.inc``::

    008_005_02 1s2 2p1
    008_006_03 1s2 2p2
    008_007_04 1s2 2p3
    008_008_03 1s2 2p4
    008_009_02 1s2 2p5
    008_010_01 1s2 2p6

    011_005_02 1s2 2p1
    011_006_03 1s2 2p2
    011_007_04 1s2 2p3
    011_008_03 1s2 2p4
    011_009_02 1s2 2p5
    011_010_01 1s2 2p6
    011_011_02 1s2 2p6 2s1
    011_012_01 1s2 2p6 2s2
    011_013_02 1s2 2p6 2s2 3p1

    013_011_02 1s1
    013_012_01 1s2
    013_013_02 1s2 2p1
    013_014_03 1s2 2p2

    014_011_02 1s1
    014_012_01 1s2
    014_013_02 1s2 2p1
    014_014_03 1s2 2p2


Simple template file for PSI4
-----------------------------

The following template file uses the BLYP functionals and the built-in
``cc-pvdz`` basis set of PSI4::

    molecule {
     ${charge} ${mult}
     ${element} 0.0 0.0 0.0
    }

    set {
     basis cc-pvdz
     scf_type df
     guess sad
     molden_write true
     reference uhf
    }

    energy('blyp')

Note that the flags ``molden_write true`` and ``reference uhf`` are required.
The former instructs the SCF program to write the orbitals, which Horton picks
up to compute atomic densities. The latter is needed because usually most of the
atomic computations are open-shell systems. Because PSI4 only writes Molden
files for SCF computations, it is not possible to prepare atomic densities with
other levels of theory.

.. _wpart:

``horton-wpart.py`` -- AIM analysis based on a wavefunction file
================================================================

The basic usage of ``horton-wpart.py`` is as follows::

    horton-wpart.py wfn output.h5[:group] {b,h,hi,is,he} [atoms.h5]

This script has four important arguments:

1. The ``wfn`` argument can be a Gaussian03 or 09 formatted checkpoint file, a
   Molekel file or a Molden input file.

2. The output file in which the partitioning results are written. The output
   is written in HDF5 format. Usually, the output file has the extension
   ``.h5``. The output file is optionally followed by a colon and a group
   suffix. This suffix can be used to specify a group in the HDF5 output file
   where the output is stored.

3. The third argument refers to the partitioning scheme:

    * ``b``: Becke partitioning. [becke1988_multicenter]_
    * ``h``: Hirshfeld partitioning. [hirshfeld1977]_
    * ``hi``: Iterative Hirshfeld partitioning. [bultinck2007]_
    * ``is``: Iterative Stockholder partitioning. [lillestolen2008]_
    * ``he``: Extended Hirshfeld partitioning. [verstraelen2013]_

4. The ``atoms.h5`` argument is only needed for the Hirshfeld variants, not for
   ``b`` and ``is``. The file ``atoms.h5`` contains a database of pro-atoms and
   can be generated as explained in :ref:`atomdb`.

This script computes atomic weight functions and then derives all AIM
observables that are implemented for that scheme. These results are stored in
the specified HDF5 output file.

Run ``horton-wpart.py --help`` to get a complete list of all command-line
options. The integration grid can be tuned with :ref:`ref_grid_option`.

.. note::

    When a post-Hartree-Fock level is used in Gaussian 03/09 (MP2, MP3, CC or
    CI), you must add the keyword ``Density=current`` to the commands in the
    Gaussian input file. This is needed to have the corresponding density matrix
    in the formatted checkpoint file. When such a post-HF density matrix is
    present, Horton will load that density matrix instead of the SCF density
    matrix. Also note that for some levels of theory, no 1RDM is constructed,
    including MP4, MP5, ZINDO and QCISD(T).

.. _cpart:

``horton-cpart.py`` -- AIM analysis based on a cube file
========================================================

The basic usage of ``horton-cpart.py`` is as follows::

    horton-cpart.py cube output.h5:group {h,hi,he} atoms.h5

The script takes three arguments:

1. The ``cube`` argument can be a Gaussian cube file (possibly generated with
   another program, e.g. CP2K). Some information must be added to the cube file
   about the effective core charges that were used. This information is needed
   to compute the correct net charges. (This is not only relevant for the final
   output, but also for constructing the proper pro-atoms. When these numbers
   are not set correctly, you'll get garbage output.)

   For example, given an original cube file with the following header::

           -Quickstep-
            ELECTRON DENSITY
              18    0.000000    0.000000    0.000000
              54    0.183933    0.000000    0.000000
              75    0.000000    0.187713    0.000000
              81    0.000000    0.000000    0.190349
               8    0.000000    0.000000    3.677294    0.000000
               8    0.000000    4.966200   10.401166    0.000000
               8    0.000000    0.000000   10.401166    0.000000
               8    0.000000    4.966200    3.677294    0.000000
               8    0.000000    2.483100    0.000000    2.243351
               8    0.000000    7.449300    0.000000   13.174925
               8    0.000000    2.483100    4.554391    4.206115
               8    0.000000    2.483100    9.524087    4.206115
               8    0.000000    7.449300    9.524087   11.212180
               8    0.000000    7.449300    4.554391   11.212180
               8    0.000000    4.966200    7.039230    7.709138
               8    0.000000    0.000000    7.039230    7.709138
              14    0.000000    2.483100    2.971972    1.606588
              14    0.000000    2.483100   11.106506    1.606588
              14    0.000000    7.449300   11.106506   13.811687
              14    0.000000    7.449300    2.971972   13.811687
              14    0.000000    2.483100    7.039230    5.959157
              14    0.000000    7.449300    7.039230    9.459119

   Now consider the case that 6 effective electrons were used for oxygen and 4
   effective electrons for silicon. Then, the second column in the atom lines
   has to be set to the effective core charge. (This number is not used in the
   cube format.) In this case, you get::

           -Quickstep-
            ELECTRON DENSITY
              18    0.000000    0.000000    0.000000
              54    0.183933    0.000000    0.000000
              75    0.000000    0.187713    0.000000
              81    0.000000    0.000000    0.190349
               8    6.0         0.000000    3.677294    0.000000
               8    6.0         4.966200   10.401166    0.000000
               8    6.0         0.000000   10.401166    0.000000
               8    6.0         4.966200    3.677294    0.000000
               8    6.0         2.483100    0.000000    2.243351
               8    6.0         7.449300    0.000000   13.174925
               8    6.0         2.483100    4.554391    4.206115
               8    6.0         2.483100    9.524087    4.206115
               8    6.0         7.449300    9.524087   11.212180
               8    6.0         7.449300    4.554391   11.212180
               8    6.0         4.966200    7.039230    7.709138
               8    6.0         0.000000    7.039230    7.709138
              14    4.0         2.483100    2.971972    1.606588
              14    4.0         2.483100   11.106506    1.606588
              14    4.0         7.449300   11.106506   13.811687
              14    4.0         7.449300    2.971972   13.811687
              14    4.0         2.483100    7.039230    5.959157
              14    4.0         7.449300    7.039230    9.459119

2. The output file in which the partitioning results are written. The output
   is written in HDF5 format. Usually, the output file has the extension
   ``.h5``. The output file is optionally followed by a colon and a group
   suffix. This suffix can be used to specify a group in the HDF5 output file
   where the output is stored.

3. The third argument refers to the partitioning scheme:

        * ``h``: Hirshfeld partitioning. [hirshfeld1977]_
        * ``hi``: Iterative Hirshfeld partitioning. [bultinck2007]_
        * ``he``: Extended Hirshfeld partitioning. [verstraelen2013]_

4. The fourth argument is the pro-atom database generated with ``horton-atomdb.py``

The ``horton-cpart.py`` script computes atomic weight functions and then derives
all AIM observables that are implemented for that scheme. These results are
stored in the specifief HDF5 output file.

The ``horton-cpart.py`` script is somewhat experimental. Always make sure that the
numbers converge with an increase in the number of grid points. You may need the
following options to control the efficiency of the program:

* ``--compact COMPACT``. Automatically determine cutoff radii for the pro-atoms,
  where ``COMPACT`` is the maximum number of electrons lost in the tail after
  the cutoff radius. 0.001 is typically a reasonable value for ``COMPACT``. The
  pro-atoms are renormalized after setting the cutoff radii. One cutoff radius
  is defined per element. This implies that the tail of the most diffuse anion
  determines the cutoff radius when the ``--compact`` option is used.

* ``--greedy``. This enables a more memory-hungry version of the Iterative and
  Extended Hirshfeld algorithms that runs considerably faster. This becomes
  unfeasible for systems with huge unit cells.

* ``--stride STRIDE``. The ``STRIDE`` parameter controls the subsampling of the
  cube file prior to the partitioning. It is ``1`` by default.

Run ``horton-cpart.py --help`` to get a complete list of all command-line
options.

.. _partition:

Python interface to the partitioning code
=========================================

The ``horton-wpart.py`` and ``horton-cpart.py`` scripts have a rather intuitive
Python interface that allows you to run a more customized analysis. The script
``data/examples/wpart/becke.py`` is a simple example that runs a Becke partitioning
where only the charges are computed and written to a simple text file.

.. literalinclude:: ../data/examples/wpart/becke.py

The unit tests in the source code contain many small examples that can be used
as a starting point for similar scripts. These unit tests can be found in
``horton/part/test/test_wpart.py`` and ``horton/part/test/test_cpart.py``.

.. _faq:

Frequently asked questions
==========================

**Which atoms-in-molecules (AIM or partitioning) scheme should I use?**

    There is no single partitioning scheme that is most suitable for any
    application. Nevertheless, some people claim that only one AIM scheme should
    be used above all others, especially in the QTAIM and electron density
    communities. Try to stay away from such fanboyism as it has little to do
    with good science.

    In practice, the choice depends on the purposes you have in mind. You should
    try to select a scheme that shows some desirable behavior.
    Typically, you would like to have a compromise between some of the following
    features:

    * Numerical stability.
    * Robustness with respect to conformational changes.
    * Uniqueness of the result.
    * Computational efficiency.
    * Mathematical elegance.
    * Simplicity.
    * Linearity in the density (matrix).
    * Chemical transferability.
    * Applicable to a broad range of systems.
    * Applicable to periodic/isolated systems.
    * Applicable to a broad range of electronic structure methods/implementations.
    * Accuracy of electrostatic interactions with a limited multipole expansion
      of the atoms.
    * Good (empirical) correlations between some AIM property with some experimental
      observable.
    * ...

    It goes beyond the scope of this FAQ to describe how each partitioning scheme
    (implemented in Horton or not) performs for these criteria. Some of these
    features are also very hard to assess and subject of intense debate in the
    literature.

    Regarding our own work, the following papers are directly related to this
    question:

    * [verstraelen2011a]_ "Assessment of Atomic Charge Models for Gas-Phase Computations on Polypeptides"
    * [verstraelen2012a]_ "The conformational sensitivity of iterative stockholder partitioning schemes"
    * [verstraelen2013]_ "Hirshfeld-E Partitioning: AIM Charges with an Improved Trade-off between Robustness and Accurate Electrostatics"

    The following are also related to this question, but the list is far from
    complete:

    * [bultinck2007]_ "Critical analysis and extension of the Hirshfeld atoms in molecules"
    * [bultinck2007b]_ "Uniqueness and basis set dependence of iterative Hirshfeld charges"

    If you have more suggestions, please drop me a note: Toon.Verstraelen@UGent.be.


**What is the recommended level of theory for the computation of the database of pro-atoms?**

    This question is relevant to the following methods implemented in Horton:
    Hirshfeld, Hirshfeld-I and Hirshfeld-E. They are referred to in this answer
    as Hirshfeld-like schemes.

    In principle, you are free to choose any level of theory you prefer. In
    practice, several papers tend to be consistent in the level of theory (and
    basis set) that is used for the molecular and pro-atomic computations.
    See for example: [bultinck2007]_, [verstraelen2009]_, [verstraelen2011a]_,
    [verstraelen2011b]_, [vanduyfhuys2012]_, [verstraelen2012a]_,
    [verstraelen2012b]_, [verstraelen2013]_.

    One motivation for this consistency is that Hirshfeld-like partitioning
    schemes yield atoms-in-molecules that are maximally similar to the
    pro-atoms. [nalewajski2000]_ (Technically speaking, the sum over all atoms
    of the `Kullback-Leibler divergence
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kullback%E2%80%93Leibler_divergence>`_
    between the atom-in-molecule and pro-atom is minimized.)
    This principle is (or should be) one of the reasons that Hirhsfeld-like
    charges are somewhat transferable between chemically similar atoms. You
    could hope that the Kullback-Leibler divergence is easier to minimize when
    the molecular and pro-atomic densities are computed as consistently as
    possible, hence with the same level of theory and basis set.

    Another motivation is that such consistency may result in, to some degree,
    cancellation of errors, when comparing Hirshfeld-like charges computed at different
    levels of theory. For example, it is found that Hirshfeld-I charges have
    only a small basis set dependence. [bultinck2007b]_ In this work, the
    molecular and pro-atomic densities were computed consistently.

    At last, you could also argue that without the consistency in level of
    theory, there are so many possible combinations that it becomes impossible
    to make a well-motivated choice. Then again, this is a problem that
    computational chemists usually embrace with open arms in the hope that they
    will find a unique combination of levels of theory that turns out to be
    useful.


**How can one generate Cube files with CP2K?**

    Electron density cube files can be generated with CP2K by adding the following section to the CP2K the input file: `E_DENSITY_CUBE <http://manual.cp2k.org/trunk/CP2K_INPUT/FORCE_EVAL/DFT/PRINT/E_DENSITY_CUBE.html>`_.
