..
    : Horton is a development platform for electronic structure methods.
    : Copyright (C) 2011-2015 The Horton Development Team
    :
    : This file is part of Horton.
    :
    : Horton is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
    : modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License
    : as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 3
    : of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
    :
    : Horton is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
    : but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
    : MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
    : GNU General Public License for more details.
    :
    : You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
    : along with this program; if not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>
    :
    : --

Conversion between file formats
###############################


``horton-convert.py`` -- Conversion between file formats supported by HORTON
============================================================================

The script ``horton-convert.py`` converts between different file formats supported by HORTON. It is used as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

    horton-convert.py input_file output_file

The formats of the input and output file are deduced from the file names. The conversion will only work if the required information for the output file format is present in the input file. See :ref:`ref_file_formats` for more information.

This script is typically useful for archiving large amounts of data that are produced by other codes in text format. The following example converts a ``.cube`` file to HORTON's internal HDF5 format and then uses ``h5repack``, one of the HDF5 command-line tools, to compress the binary file.

.. code-block:: bash

    horton-convert.py density.cube density_cube.h5
    h5repack -v -f GZIP=1 density_cube.h5 density_cube_gzip.h5


.. _hdf2csv:

``horton-hdf2csv.py`` -- Conversion of HDF5 files to CSV format
===============================================================

The script ``horton-hdf2csv.py`` is used as follows::

    horton-hdf2csv.py somefile.h5:path/in/hdf5/file otherfile.csv

For example, if ``horton-wpart.py`` was used to run an Extended Hirshfeld partitioning of a wavefunction in ``gaussian.fchk``, then the following would convert the results into CSV format::

    horton-hdf2csv.py wpart_he_results.h5 extended_hirshfeld.csv

This script was added for the convenience of those who do not know how to process the HDF5 output generated by the HORTON scripts. If you know how, please process the HDF5 files directly with custom (Python) scripts. This would be far easier than interfacing to the CSV files. The `h5py <http://www.h5py.org/>`_ library is a great tool to make such custom scripts.
